PEP 9999: Calendar versioning for Python (#8)
hugovk/peps: peps/pep-9999.rst

   * *A* is the major version number
     -- it is only incremented for really major changes in the language.
   * *B* is the minor version number
     -- it is incremented for less earth-shattering changes.
   * *C* is the micro version number
     -- it is incremented for each bugfix release.

Python predates SemVer
----------------------

`Semantic Versioning <https://semver.org/>`__ (SemVer)
is a popular scheme which aims to communicate the intent of a release.

   Given a version number MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, increment the:

   1. MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes
   2. MINOR version when you add functionality in a backward compatible manner
   3. PATCH version when you make backward compatible bug fixes

People often assume Python follows SemVer and complain about breaking changes
in feature releases. But Python predates SemVer by at least 15 years:
the SemVer spec was `introduced in 2009
<https://github.com/semver/semver.org/commit/ca645805ca206e83c7153c64f9bda54afff06262>`__
and the Python scheme was `added to source control in 1994
<https://github.com/hugovk/cpython/commit/95f61a7ef067dbcabccc9b45ee885b0d55922c5f>`__

> for the 1.0 release.

Reviewer: you can also add a reference how semver is just good intentions:
https://hynek.me/articles/semver-will-not-save-you/

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic/issues/5821 for when I completely broke pydantic in a SemVer-compliant bugfix release of typing_extensions, which implemented a change that pydantic had asked for 🙃

PEP: 9999
Title: Calendar versioning for Python
Author: Hugo van Kemenade
Discussions-To: <REQUIRED: URL of current canonical discussion thread>
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 20-May-2024
Python-Version: 3.26
Post-History: <REQUIRED: dates, in dd-mmm-yyyy format, and corresponding links to PEP discussion threads>

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes updating the versioning scheme for Python to include
the calendar year.
This aims to make the support lifecycle clear
by making it easy to see when a version was first released,

> and easier to work out when it will reach end-of-life.

Reviewer 2: "end of life" should be hyphenated when it's used as an adjective, but here it's being used as a noun, so the hyphens are unnecessary :)

Also: you use the EOL initialism later in the PEP; let's define that here.

```suggestion
and easier to work out when it will reach end of life (EOL).
```

   * *B* is the minor version number
     -- it is incremented for less earth-shattering changes.
   * *C* is the micro version number
     -- it is incremented for each bugfix release.

Python predates SemVer
----------------------

`Semantic Versioning <https://semver.org/>`__ (SemVer)
is a popular scheme which `aims to communicate the intent
<https://hynek.me/articles/semver-will-not-save-you/>`__ of a release.

   Given a version number MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, increment the:

   1. MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes
   2. MINOR version when you add functionality in a backward compatible manner
   3. PATCH version when you make backward compatible bug fixes

People often assume Python follows SemVer and complain about breaking changes
in feature releases. But Python predates SemVer by at least 15 years:
the SemVer spec was `introduced in 2009
<https://github.com/semver/semver.org/commit/ca645805ca206e83c7153c64f9bda54afff06262>`__
and the Python scheme was `added to source control in 1994
<https://github.com/hugovk/cpython/commit/95f61a7ef067dbcabccc9b45ee885b0d55922c5f>`__
for the 1.0 release.

> If Python adopted SemVer, we’d essentially get a new major bump every year when
> we remove deprecations.
> Some projects have adopted another versioning scheme based on the calendar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Python adopted SemVer, that would imply a new major bump every year when
we remove deprecations.

Instead of SemVer, however,
some projects have adopted another versioning scheme based on the calendar.
```

Non-goals
---------

Like the current scheme, only the micro version would be incremented for bug
fix and security releases, with no change to the major and minor. For example:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * -
     - Current scheme
     - Proposed 3.YY.micro
   * - Initial release (Oct ’26)
     - 3.15.0
     - 3.26.0
   * - 1st bugfix release (Dec ’26)
     - 3.15.1
     - 3.26.1
   * - 2nd bugfix release (Feb ’27)
     - 3.15.2
     - 3.26.2
   * - ...
     - ...
     - ...
   * - Final security release (Oct ’31)
     - 3.15.17
     - 3.26.17

No change to :pep:`602` (Annual Release Cycle for Python):

* No change to the 17 months to develop a feature version: alphas, betas and
  release candidates.

* No change to the support duration:
  two years of full support and three years of security fixes.

* No change to the annual October release cadence.

Specification
=============

Python versions are numbered 3.YY.micro where:

* *3* is the major version number
  – it is always 3.

* *YY* is the minor version number
  - it is the short year number: ``{year} - 2000``.

* *micro* is the micro version number
  - it is incremented for each bugfix or security release.

> We'll keep major version 3. Python 3 is the brand, there will be no Python 4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll keep major version 3. Python 3 is the brand; there will be no Python 4.
```

In the year 2100, the minor will be ``2100-2000 = 100``,

> therefore the version will be 3.100.0.

Reviewer 2: glad to see we're planning for the long term here

Author: Yup, it came up in the summit, during the comedy podcast, and on Mastodon.

I liked Russel's suggestion (I think it was his) that the 3 stands for 3rd millennium! I won't confuse this PEP with it, we still have 976 years for someone to propose the next CalVer PEP to incorporate this ;)

Python 3.14 is the last version before this change, released in 2025.
Python 3.26 is the first version after this change, released in 2026.
There will be no Python 3.15 to 3.25 inclusive.

Backwards compatibility
=======================

This version change is the safest of the CalVer options considered

> (see `rejected ideas <PEP 9999 rejected_>`_) because we keep major version 3
> and the minor version is still two digits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see `rejected ideas <PEP 9999 rejected_>`_): we keep 3 as the major version,
and the minor version is still two digits.
```

> The minor will eventually change to three digits, but this is predictable,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The minor will eventually change to three digits but this is predictable,
```

a long way off and can be planned for.

We retain the ``python3`` executable.

Version mapping
---------------

> Versions 3.15 to 3.25 inclusive will be skipped.

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether it would be worth shipping a `python3.15` executable as part of Python 3.26, that just immediately errors out and tells you to use `python3.26` instead

Author: This is an interesting idea! I'll mention it as a possibility in "How to teach this" and we can see what folk think.

We can already update documentation during the 3.14 cycle.
This gives plenty of notice.

We can make preview builds which only change the version for early testing.

.. _PEP 9999 Rejected:

Rejected ideas
==============

YY.0
----

For example, Python 26.0 would be released in 2026.

There's `not much appetite for Python version 4
<https://www.techrepublic.com/article/programming-languages-why-python-4-0-will-probably-never-arrive-according-to-its-creator/>`__.
`We don’t want to repeat 2-to-3
<https://web.archive.org/web/20220906155615/https://twitter.com/gvanrossum/status/1306082472443084801>`__,
and 4 has a lot of expectations by now.
We don’t want “earth-shattering changes”.

Perhaps 4 could be reserved for something big like removing the GIL
(:pep:`703`),
but the Steering Council made it clear the `rollout must be gradual
<https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-703-making-the-global-interpreter-lock-optional-in-cpython-acceptance/37075>`__.
Will we stick with `version 3 forever
<https://discuss.python.org/t/python-3-13-alpha-1-contains-breaking-changes-whats-the-plan/37490/11>`__?

Another option is to put the year in the major version and jump to 26.0.

> This means we could leapfrog all that 4.0 baggage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This could mean we could leapfrog all that 4.0 baggage.
```

This introduces additional complexity and cost.

CPython changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to ``python3`` command changes, there are at least four places in
CPython that assume the major version is 3 and would need updating:

* `Lib/ast.py <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/406ffb5293a8c9ca315bf63de1ee36a9b33f9aaf/Lib/ast.py#L50-L51>`__
* `Parser/pegen.c <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/406ffb5293a8c9ca315bf63de1ee36a9b33f9aaf/Parser/pegen.c#L654-L658>`__
* `Parser/pegen.h <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/406ffb5293a8c9ca315bf63de1ee36a9b33f9aaf/Parser/pegen.h#L284-L288>`__
* `Parser/string_parser.c <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/406ffb5293a8c9ca315bf63de1ee36a9b33f9aaf/Parser/string_parser.c#L38-L43>`__

YY.0 rejection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The benefits of calendar versioning are not so big compared to the combined
costs for YY.0. Therefore, YY.0 is rejected.

YY.mm
-----

For example, Python 26.10 would be released in October 2026.

Building upon YY.0 we could also include the release month as the minor
version, like Ubuntu and Black. This makes it clear *when* in the year it was
released, and also *when* in the year it will reach end-of-life.

> However, YY.mm is rejected for the same reasons as YY.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, YY.mm is rejected for many of the same reasons as YY.0.
```

3.YYYY
------

For example, Python 3.2026 would be released in 2026.

It's clearer that the minor version is a year when using a four digits, and

> avoids confusion with Ubuntu versions which use YY.mm, but rejected as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
avoids confusion with Ubuntu versions which use YY.mm. However, this is rejected as
```
